"Attacking Faulty Reasoning"
By T. Edward Damer
http://amzn.to/2Aey02z


A sound argument must consist of 
       A: a set of premises, each of which must be true and 
       B: a conclusion that must follow from the premises in a logical form.
There are two types of arguments, deductive and deductive. 
A deductive argument is "one whose form is such that the conclusion follows with logical necessity or 
certainty from the premise." ("All sodas are carbonated" and "Pepsi is a soda" hence "Pepsi is 
carbonated.")
An inductive argument is one in which the premises provide some, but not all, of the evidence for the 
truth of the conclusion. This approach, however is not foolproof ("Joe is a popular guy" "Popular people 
can win an election" hence "Joe will win the election"). Any conclusion of an inductive argument is only 
probable. 
A fallacy is a mistake in reasoning, and a fallacious argument is one that contains one or more fallacies. 
Fallacious reasoning can also be used as a diversionary technique or to muddle clear thinking. 
Fallacies of Linguistic Confusion
Equivocation involves "making a word or phrase, employed in two different senses in an argument, 
appear to have the same meaning throughout." For an argument to be sound, words must maintain the 
same definition throughout.
Example: "My professor tells me learning logic will teach me how to argue." "But people argue too 
much today anyway," with the word "argue" being used in two different senses.
Disarm: By asking for precise definition of the word in question. Or, look for an absurd example that 
points out the misuse ("Only men are rational" and "No man is a woman" ergo "No woman is rational").

Semantical Ambiguity involves using a word that can be interpreted in two different ways, without 
making clear which of the two ways the word is meant. ? With equivocation, the word is deliberately 
misused, but with semantical ambiguity, it is left up to the listener to misinterpret the meaning. 
Example: "Yesterday I moved into a new house." Is the house "new" or is it just new for me 
Disarm: Identify the confused or ambiguous word, ask the speaker for the meaning. If that is not 
possible, explicitly hypothesize about the intended meaning and draw conclusions from there. 

Syntactical Ambiguity involves using ambiguities in grammatical construction such that a claim can be 
legitimately interpreted in two different ways. Syntactical Ambiguity is different from semantical 
ambiguity in that it can be resolved through the reconstruction of the statement. Syntactic confusion 
("amphiboles" as grammarians call it) can arise from unclear pronoun reference, elliptical construction, 
unclear modifiers, careless use of words such as "only" and "all." 
Example: "John likes poker better than his wife." Better than his wife likes poker, or he likes poker more 
than he likes his wife?  
Disarm: Ask the speaker for a reconstruction of the phrase.

False Ambiguity involves the listener assuming an improper conclusion from carelessly or knowingly 
interpreting a word, or phrase with multiple meanings. The interpretation is not justified by the context..
Example: Someone seeing the sign "Free picnic tables ahead" assuming that taking a picnic table be OK 
because it is free.
Disarm: confront the person directly, pointing out what it is about the context that makes the 
interpretation unjustified. 

16/130



       



