“The Myth and the Machine Volume One: Technics and Human Development”
By Lewis Mumford, 1966

http://amzn.to/2AQhpn1


SUMS:

Mumford wrote this book to “re-examine the nature of man and the whole course of technological change.” 

When this book was published, there appeared to be a widely-held idea that what makes man different from all the other beasts was his ability to make and use tools. In part, this book is a refutation of that idea. Instead, he argues, it was culture that is the primary force driving consciousness and progress. I'm not so much interested in this thesis as much as the exploration of what drives the development of technology itself. 

Our daily actions don’t fit the widely-held idea that what sets us above the rest of creation is that we are tool-using critters.  Sometime in the past, our forefolks “mistakenly coupled their particular mode of mechanical progress with an unjustifiable sense of increasing moral superiority.”

This belief is at least partially supported in our museums, which are filled with primitive tools and machines, telling a story of a mechanically-minded society. What is harder to find, however, are any material remains of “ritual, social organization, morals, and language.” These, Mumford argued, played greater roles in the rise of civilization.

It was all the doing of “myth, magic, religion, and the nascent science of astronomy.”

QUOTES
“With this new ‘megatechnics’ the dominant minority will create a uniform, all-enveloping, super-planetary-structure, designed for automatic operation. Instead of functioning actively as an autonomous personality, man will become a passive, purposeless, machine-conditioned animal whose proper functions, as technicians now interpret man’s role, will either be fed into the machine, or strictly limited and controlled for the benefit of de-personalized, collective organizations.” P. 3 [Me: WTF]
“Our predecessors mistakenly coupled their particular mode of mechanical progress with an unjustifiable sense of increasing moral superiority.” P. 4
“More than a century ago Thomas Carlyle described man as a ‘tool-using animal,’ as if this were the one trait that elevated him above the rest of creation.” P. 5
“What is specially and uniquely human is man’s capacity to combine a wide variety of animal propensities into an emergent cultural entity: a human personality.” P. 6
“Early man’s hands and pebble tools played a significant part in his development, mainly because … they facilitated the preparatory functions of picking, carrying, and macerating food, and thus liberated the mouth for speech.” P. 6
“...the primeval repetitive order of ritual, a mode of order man was forced to develop, in self-protection, so as to control the tremendous overcharge of psychal energy that his large brain placed at his disposal.”
“Every manifestation of human culture, from ritual and speech to costume and social organization, is directed ultimately to the remodeling of the human organism and the expression of the human personality.” P. 10
The remarkable thing about the rise of civilization “is that it was the result, not of mechanical inventions, but of a radically new type of social organization: a product of myth, magic, religion, and the nascent science of astronomy.” P. 11
“…cosmic order was the basis of this new human order.” P. 12
“Modern man has formed a curiously distorted picture of himself, by interpreting his early history in terms of his present interests in making machines and conquering nature.” P. 14
“In the realm of prehistory the generalist has a special office, that of bringing together widely separated fields, prudently fenced in by specialists, into a larger common area, visible only from the air.” P. 16
“It is wiser to assume … that Home sapiens fifty thousand years ago more closely represented ourselves than any remoter animal ancestor.” P. 22
“Our chief reason for over-rating the importance of tools and machines is that man’s most significant early inventions, in ritual, social organization, morals, and language, left no material remains…” p. 23
“With his highly organized nervous equipment, this brainy creature could take more risks than any other animal could afford, because he eventually had something more than the dumb animal insight necessary for correcting his inevitable mistakes and aberrations.”  P. 25
“The development of the central nervous system liberated man in large degree from the automatism of his instinctual patterns and his reflexes, and from confinement to the immediate environment in time and space.” P. 26
“The difference between the brain and the mind is surely as great as that between a phonograph and the music that comes forth from it.” P. 27
“Not how long you live, but how much you have lived, how much meaning your life has absorbed and passed on, is what matters.” P. 33
“It is only through the light of consciousness that the universe becomes visible, and should that light disappear, only nothingness would remain.” P. 33
“In short, without man’s cumulative capacity to give symbolic form to experience, to reflect upon it and re-fashion it, and project it, the physical universe would be as empty of meaning as a handless clock: its ticking would tell nothing. The mindfulness of man makes the difference.” P. 35
“In man, this pre-vision and pro-vision for the future becomes increasingly conscious and deliberate in dream images and playful anticipations, in the tentative trying out of imagined alternatives.” P. 44
“If survival were all that mattered to primitive man, he could have survived with no better equipment than his immediate hominid ancestors had possessed.” P. 45
“Though dogs may dream, no dream ever taught a dog to imitate a bird or to behave like a God.” P. 49
“Creativity begins in the unconsciousness; and its first manifestation is the dream.” P. 50 
“It was a dream that opened man’s eyes to new possibilities in his waking life” P. 51
“Our highly mechanized Western civilization has many devices for limiting the province of the dream: we even canalize the subjective life into collective mechanisms like the radio and television, and let a 
machine do our dreaming for us.” P. 53
“From the dream, man got his first hint that there is more to his experience than meets the eye.” P. 54
“But the fact that tools, not just slivers, were produced shows that there is a counter-tendency in man, equally innate, and even more deeply, or at least more permanently, satisfying: the arts of creation and 
constructive organization, the deliberate forming of patterns, the putting together of ordered whole.” P. 55
Savage pathology: “The formidable, irrational components that remain in civilized man’s own code of  conduct.” P. 56
“Ungoverned creativity in science and invention has reinforced unconscious demonic drives that have placed our whole civilization in a state of perilous unbalance.” P. 57-58
“Man had to re-form and re-instate [animal instincts] at a higher level, illuminated by consciousness; and had to make this transformation possible, and to make this transformation possible, he was driven to give some sort of orderly sequence and pattern to his daily activities.” P. 59
We have all had the experience, same as early man, “when we find that a dawning intuition cannot be translated into communicable speech for a lack of a fresh vocabulary.” P. 59
“Ritual is older than language in man’s development and played an indispensable part.” P. 61
“The mechanical order of ritual may have been a benign alternative to compulsion neurosis.” P. 62
“The original purpose of ritual was to create order and meaning where none existed.” P. 62
“Before man could discover and project order outside himself he had first by constant repetition, to establish it within.” P. 62
“However destitute a culture may be of clothing or shelter or tools, it will nevertheless show a richly developed ceremonialism.” P. 63
“Both wild spontaneity and monotonous repetition are equally native and equally pleasurable to the very young; and because this native capacity for forms that can be fixed and repeated was so deeply rooted and so subjectively rewarding it seems probable that it provided the groundwork of man’s whole development.” P. 64
“Rituals by their very success too often fall back into the automatism of unconscious existence, and so arrest human development.” P. 65
“The creation of this realm of the sacred, ‘a realm apart’ serving as a connecting link between the seen and the unseen, the temporal and the eternal, was one of the decisive steps in the transformation of man” p. 67
While ritual played an important role in man’s development, it “succeeded only with a certain loss of creativity.”
“The prevalence of ritual and all its derivative institutional manifestations accounts therefore for both the facts of early human development and its extreme slowness.” P. 68
“Against the lawless absolution of his unconsciousness, man needed a lawful counter-force equally absolute. At the beginning the taboo alone provided this necessary balance.” P. 70 
“Language was a life-reflecting, life-enhancing instrument long before it could be shaped for the restricted purposes of intelligent communication.” P. 73
“Voluminous oral expression must have preceded continent, intelligible speech by untold years.” P. 73
“As for the effort to do away with emotionality, presupposing that respect for emotional values necessarily brings about a betrayal of truth, this view overlooks the fact that the very ‘dryness’ of so-called objective description may in itself be an indication of an unfortunate negative state, with equal dangers of distortion.” P. 73
“As it turned out, the most impalpable and evanescent of man's creations before writing was invented, the mere breadth of his mind, has turned out to be the most formative human achievement: every other subsequent advance in human culture, even tool-making, depended on it.”
“A lion says ‘lion' by its own presence far more emphatically than the word ‘lion’ even if shouted"
“If man had originally inhabited a world as blankly uniform as a ‘high-rise' housing development , as featureless as a parking lot, as destitute of life as an automated factory, it is doubtful if he would have had a sufficiently varied sensory experience to retain images, mold language, or acquire ideas.”
“For the dream can present ideas only in disguised story form, a wild masquerade.”
“Without such steadfast application to the formation of mind and intensification of consciousness, all the tools in the world would not have raised man above the level of the ants and termites.”
“Some anthropologists and biologists are now inclined to associate the formation of language with the cooperative hunting techniques that must have come into existence when, during the successive glacial periods, man in Europe and Asia became dependent upon hunting big game—the hairy mammoth, the bison, the rhinoceros, and the horse.”
“There is scattered evidence in cave art of the re-enactment of the hunt in ritual, probably both as a rehearsal in preparation and as an aftermath of celebration.” 
“For while the ‘language of the concrete’ want words of command might often suffice for present purposes, only a comprehensive language structure can recall the past, anticipate the future, or embrace the invisible and the distant. A general improvement in symbolic thinking was what possibly gave Homo sapiens the edge over the earlier Neanderthal types.”
Helen Keller's teachers "used to restrain her from making inartiuculate sounds; but she felt a greayt desire to make them, and would sometimes shut herself up and 'indulge herself in a surfeit of sounds.'" p. 83
The final step was "the passage from the symbolic translation of immediate things and events to creating new entities and situations within the mind, purely by manipulation of symbols." p. 83
"That abstract sounds could bring to mind actual people, concrete places and objects, was the fundamental magic property of speech: but there was an even more potent magic in the fact that these same or similar sounds, differently organized, might bring into the mind events that had ceased, or project entirely new experiences." p. 83
"No other art rivals speech in inviting a contribution from each member of the group: no other art expresses individuality so definitely, so economically."
The baby learns that "special sounds stand for things, relations, acts, feelings, desires." p. 84
"Thus a certain amount of mechanical drill was essential toi even thew simplest speech; and such drillmust have been far more constant than tool-making or hunting."
"No mechanical system knows the meaning of meaning." p. 87
"Without that strictness of standardization, without that emphasis on magical correctness, man's earliest words mightr have dissolved into thin air, leaving not a trace, long before writing could be invented." p. 88
"If meanings were not standardized and stablized in words, so that changes would take generations or even centuries befor ethey were generally accepted, each person would speak a private language." p. 88
Max Müller: "This Fundamental Metaphor, this universal mythology, this flowing of our spirit into objective chaos and recreating it in our own image." p. 91
"A large part of all maagic formulae consists of a precise series of nonsense syllables repeated ad nauseam." p. 92








