


"The White Album"
Joan Didion, 1979 
http://amzn.to/2E4MtRn
http://joabj.com/Writing/Books/Covers/White_Album.jpg

"Sticky Fingers: The Life and Times of Jann Wenner and Rolling Stone Magazine"
Joe Hagan, 2017
http://amzn.to/2DX65qm
http://joabj.com/Writing/Books/Covers/Sticky_Fingers.jpg

David Hockney photos:
http://joabj.com/Photos/2017/1712-FA-David_Hockney-Swimming_Pool.jpg
http://joabj.com/Photos/2017/1712-FA-David_Hockney-Swimming.jpg
http://joabj.com/Photos/2017/1712-FA-David_Hockney-American_Collectors.jpg
The collection of essays that make up "The White Album," Joan Didion asserts almost 
immediately, are about the collapse of meaning, about the dissolution of the narratives told to 
guide us through life. In the era that she penned them, the late 1960s and early 1970s, western 
culture itself was shifting, from order to disorder, seemingly. The entrenched powers of the old 
were giving way to the strength of the young ("They got the guns, but we got the numbers," the 
Lizard King sang at the time). On the personal level, Didion's defense mechanisms were failing 
at the same time. So, what is left, this book asks. 

Like the 1968 Beatles album it is named after, this collection jumps around quite a bit, resisting 
thematic cohesion altogether. Centered around Didion's time living in an about-to-be-demolished 
Hollywood mansion, the book itself lurches along like a trail of memories. Many pieces were 
snippets from magazine pieces she wrote at the time. One moment, we are in the recording studio 
with The Doors, who seem to do almost nothing for hours at end. Soon after, we are bearing 
witness to the press testimony of Black Panther co-founder Huey Newton, just before he stood 
trial for the manslaughter of an Oakland police officer. 
But a funny thing emerges from this collection: just as Didion journals the dissolution the old 
narratives, she builds new ones from the rubble. When she meets with one of the Manson Killers, 
its not her convos with girl, but with the lawyer after that sticks with her. Every detail, no matter 
how seemingly off topic, is up for grabs in a linear chain of understanding. 
In this age of Instagram and Facebook, it's nearly impossible not to create a narrative of your life. 
Critics argue the social media persona is contrived, but is not all life contrived, empty until 
imposed upon with meaning of some sort, willfully or no? 
 

One person who greatly capitalized on this age of shifting norms was Jann Wenner, the founder 
and publisher of Rolling Stone, the defining periodical for the late 1960s and much of the 1970s, 
argues Joe Hagan's new biography of Wenner and Rolling Stone, "Sticky Fingers." 
To provide a voice for the emerging youth counterculture, Wenner was the right person at the 
right time. Growing up on the west coast, he saw early the power of the emerging psychedelic 
youth culture. "For the first time in the history of man, young people had the money, the personal 
freedom, and the free time to build monuments and pleasure palaces to their own taste," Tom 
Wolf had noted of the 1960s. 
These people took their music perhaps most seriously, certainly more seriously than the 
mainstream press recognized at the time. This oversight, Jenner realized early on, was an 
opportunity. "The Dionysian energy of rock was destroying the old social forms and inventing a 
new value system around 'The sacred importance of love and truth and beauty and interpersonal 
relationships,'" Ralph Gleason noted. Or, as John Lennon told Rolling Stone, at that time, 'rock n 
roll then was real. Everything else was unreal.'" 
"There was a narcotic freedom to Rolling Stone as it charted the late 1960s, the primitive 
newsprint pages opening like a lotus flower, pedal by pedal, with revelations," Hagan wrote. For 
marketers, Wenner was the gatekeeper to this demographic, a fact to which Wenner was not 
oblivious. 
Indeed, the Rolling Stone was so revolutionary because it applied the rules of straight journalism 
to the emerging rock culture. Several years before coming up with the idea of starting a 
magazine for the emerging hippie culture, Wenner visited "The Melody Maker" in 1965. There, 
he was "astonished to see a working newsroom. populated with reporters smoking cigarettes and 
talking shop, a vision of order and professionalism amid the decadence of Carnaby." Working 
with the same printer, Rolling Stone borrowed the Fleet Street fonts and the pinstripe columns of 
the recently defunct Ramparts Sunday magazine, setting it apart from the other willfully 
unconventional underground pubs of the day. 
When it came to rock n roll, Jann Wenner was "the fan he purported to be, but that was only one 
side of him," Hagan wrote. Wenner was also an unrepentant social climber. "Though he walked 
in-step with the counterculture, he was also a Kennedy-worshipping preppy." 
He looked up to John Lennon (literally, Wenner, being 5'6", "so often found himself gazing up at 
his heroes like a boy vampire"). And he tended to fawn over his heroes, more so than they did in 
return. Whenever Mick Jagger brought up Jann Wenner's name, said Marshall Chess, "It was 
always with a dismissive wave of the royal hand. 'He'll do whatever I want.'" Jagger appeared on 
Rolling Stone's cover more than any other artist, 31 times. 
Through his magazine, Wenner, it could be argued, helped normalized gay culture within 
America. 
For all its glamorous preening, rock n roll was still almost entirely a male pursuit into the late 
1960s. Rolling Stone "made it safe for boys to ogle their male idols as rapturously as any girl 
might, by adding a healthy dose of intellectual pretense." It was Rolling Stone where Elton John 
first admitted he was gay. 
"'Being gay' said [Jann] Wenner [after the fact], 'gave me a good and finer appreciation of the 
sexuality of the guys up there on the stage. I could understand ... how sexual this whole thing 
was.'" 
The magazine's voyeuristic eye was, in turn, a stand-in for Wenner himself, who had dabbled in 
homosexuality through the decades, before finally coming out in 1995. Perhaps by exploring his 
own sexuality through Rolling Stone, he helped make homosexuality a bit more acceptable to ] 
mid-America, so too did it prod Wenner into acceptance of his own sexuality. 


As the Mansion killings and the Stones' free Altamont festival both punctured Woodstock-bred feelings 
of universal peace and love, the unity of the 1960s collective youth culture gave way to individual 
explorations and self-interests. 
Part of this culture fracturing came down to drug use, I suspect. The preference for mind-bending 
psychedelics seemed to give way to ego-enhancing cocaine. "Unlike psychedelics, which inspired cosmic 
oneness with other people, cocaine inspired feelings of acute exclusivity, separating the cocaine haves 
from the cocaine have-nots," Hagan wrote.   
In the early 1970s, Jann Wenner took to cocaine like "an Irish poet," Hagan wrote, adding that "Coke 
eventually distorted all facets of Wenner's life." The Rolling Stone staff suffered through many last-
minute frenzied "cocaine edits."
But youth culture's dreams of peace shattered into competing self-interest, "its fragments proved to be 
even more journalistically interesting," Hagan noted.
Indeed, the first half of the 1970s proved to be the journalistic highpoint of the magazine, which found 
great young writers (Cameron Crowe, P.J. O'Rourke, Joe Eszterhas), ran epic pieces from Tom Wolfe and 
other New Journalism writers, and, perhaps most importantly, introduced the world to Gonzo 
journalism, through the initial serialization of Hunter S. Thompson's "Fear & Loathing in Las Vegas."  






Through his magazine, Wenner, it could be argued, helped normalized gay culture within America. For 
all its glamorous preening, rock n roll was still almost entirely a male pursuit into the late 1960s. Rolling 
Stone "made it safe for boys to ogle their male idols as rapturously as any girl might, by adding a healthy 
dose of intellectual pretense." The magazine's voyeuristic eye was, in turn, a stand-in for Wenner 
himself, who had dabbled in homosexuality through the decades, before finally coming out in 1995. It 
was Rolling Stone where Elton John first admitted he was gay. 



One interesting contrast with Wenner and Rolling Stone was Doug Kenney and National Lampoon (as 
depicted by a recently released Netflix movie).  



******
Sticky Fingers: QUOTES/PARAPHRASES
 "...John Lennon still towered over Jann Wenner, who at 5'6", so often found himself gazing up at his 
heroes like a boy vampire." 
"As John Lennon would articulate it, for Wenner and Rolling Stone, 'rock n roll then was real. Everything 
else was unreal.'" 
"The psychedelic counterculture of San Francisco promised a revolution, one immune to capitalist 
forces." 
Jann Wenner was "the fan he purported to be, but that was only one side of him. Though he walked in-
step with the counterculture, he was also a Kennedy-worshipping preppy..."  
Jann Wenner "understood that, along with the drugs and freedom, there was fame, and also money."  
"For marketers, this new youth culture was uncharted territory and [Jann] Wenner was the pioneer." 
With the creation of Rolling Stone, founder Jann Wenner "made it safe for boys to ogle their male idols 
as rapturously as any girl might, by adding a healthy dose of intellectual pretense." 
Working with the same printer, Rolling Stone borrowed the Fleet Street fonts and the pinstripe columns 
of the recently defunct Ramparts Sunday magazine, setting it apart from the other willfully 
unconventional underground pubs of the day. Sticky Fingers
"That somebody had dared, bothered in the sentiment of the mainstream, to apply straight journalism 
to rock culture was a revelation."
Photographer Annie Leibowitz's  "intimacy with both Wenners [Jann and Jane] completed a triangle of 
ambition and pleasure that lay at the creative heart of Rolling Stone in the 1970s"
"For the first time in the history of man, young people had the money, the personal freedom, and the 
free time  to build monuments and pleasure palaces to their own taste."  - Tom Wolf on the 60s 
"'Being gay' said [Jann] Wenner, 'gave me a good and finer appreciation of the sexuality of the guys up 
there on the stage. I could understand ... how sexual this whole thing was.'" 
"It was the prickly celebrity tablet Us Weekly, [Jann Wenner's] last successful invention, highly lucrative 
but culturally toxic, that would barricade his flagging rock magazine against the collapse of both the 
record and the print industries." 
"From 1971 to 1977, Jann Wenner was the most important magazine editor in America, shepherding the 
generational plot lines of the 1960s into a rambling biweekly serial of rock n roll ..." 
"I quit everything and concentrated on making enough money so that when the kids grew up, we could 
have them psychoanalyzed" - Jann Wenner's mother 
Jann Wenner saw "LSD culture as virtuous precisely because it bypassed politics for an alternate reality." 
Visiting "The Melody Maker" in 1965, Jann Wenner was "astonished to see a working newsroom 
populated with reporters smoking cigarettes and talking shop, a vision of order and professionalism 
amid the decadence of Carnaby." 
"Are you going to let your emotional life be run by Time Magazine?" - Allen Ginsberg "America"  
"If Jann Wenner had a tail, it would always be wagging." -- Dotson Rader 
"The Dionysian energy of rock was destroying the old social forms and inventing a new value system 
around 'The sacred importance of love and truth and beauty and interpersonal relationships.'"- Ralph 
Gleason
"Forms and rhythms in music are never changed without producing changes in the most important 
political forms and ways." Plato, as quoted by Ralph Gleason to explain mid-1960s rock n roll 
"Despite the new age of freedom and self-expression, gay love was not part of the [late 60s] rock n roll 
menu." 
Crawdaddy was the first American rock n roll magazine, founded in 1966 by Paul Williams, and named 
after the club where The Rolling Stones got their start.
"When he first saw it, Mick Jagger was startled by the audacity of Rolling Stone: To name a newspaper 
after his band, and not even put The Rolling Stones on the cover of the first issue. It was an affront that 
would stick with Jagger for the next 50 years"
Paul Simon probably did his critical reputation widespread & untold harm in the mid-1960s by sleeping 
with a love interest of Jann Wenner. 
"When the inevitable blowback from a record label came, [Jann] Wenner would blame a writer or simply 
shrug. It was a cycle he was destined to repeat, fomenting controversy and then whistling past the 
ensuing storm." 
"Newsprint, which [Jann] Wenner saw merely as pragmatic until he could afford to become a 'slick,' 
gave Rolling Stone a street feel that made it more authentic than a rock exploitation magazine like 
Cheetah."  
"You can't explain to someone today how unique and essential those things were to the fiber of your 
being in those days." Bruce Springsteen quote on early rock n roll pubs Crawdaddy and Rolling Stone.
 "If Rolling Stone was a professional newspaper about rock n roll, the moment of truth was nigh. What 
did Jann Wenner really stand for? Was he a groupie? Or a fucking journalist?" On Altamont  
"In Memory of Elizabeth Reed" was carved on the gravestone where Dickey Betts consummated an 
affair with the girlfriend of Boz Scaggs, who didn't find out until he read about it in a Rolling Stone 
interview with Duane Allman .... 
"There was a narcotic freedom to Rolling Stone as it charted the late 1960s, the primitive newsprint 
pages opening like a lotus flower, pedal by pedal, with revelations." 
"The proof that Rolling Stone was a great idea was that it survived [Jann] Wenner's management." - 
"... The working class primitivism of hard rock - Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath - which Wenner 
personally detested." 
Whenever Mick Jagger brought up Jann Wenner's name, said Marshall Chess, "It was always with a 
dismissive wave of the royal hand. 'He'll do whatever I want.'" 
Mick Jagger appeared on Rolling Stone's cover more than any other artist, 31 times, and "always a 
consistent seller"... 
Just a year after Altamont, Jann Wenner put Mick Jagger on the cover of Rolling Stone: "Wenner's staff 
was outraged that he bent his knee to the man Rolling Stone virtually implicated in a local murder." 
"In late 1969, Columbia [Records], whose suited executives were indistinguishable from IBM men, ran 
an ad campaign called 'But The Man Can't Bust Out Music,' imploring rock fans to reject the 
establishment by purchasing records from Columbia."
Rolling Stone publisher Jann Wenner "had long fiddled with the [record] reviews, tweaking them for 
personal and business reasons." 
"...But what it looked like in the underground press, and to staffers at Rolling Stone, was that Jann 
Wenner had just sold his newspaper to the record companies, while their readers were being shot dead 
in the streets of America." 
Had Hunter S. Thompson "never come along, Rolling Stone might have survived as a rock n roll trade 
paper, but instead it was about to become the most adventurous and ambitious newspaper-cum-
magazine of the 1970s." 
"Wenner had, in fact, cast off the youth revolution, such as it was. But it wasn't exactly a betrayal, 
because he had never subscribed to its political tenants in the first place."
For "Fear and Loathing In Las Vegas," Hunter S. Thompson "tried expensing a laundry list of drugs, 
alcohol, and even weapons paraphernalia to Rolling Stone."
Unlike any other Hunter S.Thompson gonzo writing before or after, "Fear and Loathing In Las Vegas" 
arrived fully-formed, "requiring little editing," Jann Wenner said.
"This was it! As I started reading the now-famous first sentences, I felt a crackle of electricity in the air ... 
This is going to change everything." - Chet Flippo on reading the original draft of Hunter S. Thompson's 
"Fear and Loathing In Las Vegas." 
"The marriage of Jann and Jane had never been a conventional love. It was not so much sex that Jane 
craved from Jann Wenner as the thrust of his ambition." 
"At the time, tape-recording party talk was all the rage. As Lillian Roxon reported in the spring of 1971, 
her friends were all carefully saving and filing their cassettes for the great day when they could be 
released as social history." 
"The attention of a female with a camera was a powerful aphrodisiac for a male rock star." 
Annie Leibovitz could "intimidate people into getting naked" for the camera. If David Cassidy disrobed 
for her, why couldn't Peter Fonda?  
"The volume of what I witnessed, and saw, and photographed began to create me." 
"Leibovitz immediately fell under Jagger's spell, writing that he was the most elusive of her photographic 
muses."  
"At one point, [Truman] Capote describes the tour doctor recruiting 13 and 14 year old girls for sex play 
on the tour plane, with one such incident allegedly filmed for posterity by Robert Frank." 
Hunter S. Thompson's reportage was called "the most accurate and least factual" coverage of the 1972 
U.S. presidential campaign. 
"As he had been doing since 1967, Jann Wenner made puncturing Los Angeles egos a staple of his San 
Francisco newspaper." 
Jann Wenner "was, in effect, reframing rock n roll as a celebrity culture like any before it. It wasn't a 
movement or a youth culture any more, let alone a revolution. This was the age of personalities."
"Clive Davis was fired from CBS for allegedly charging his son's $20,000 Bar Mitzvah to the company 
expense account."
Tom Wolfe's fame "made [Rolling Stone] the center of gravity for New Journalism, at the movement's 
high-water mark." 
"The youth movement in the 1960s seemed to be essentially unitary, but as it shattered, its fragments 
proved to be even more journalistically interesting."
"'Glamour,' someone once wrote, 'required looking like you didn't work.'" 
"Coke eventually distorted all facets of Wenner's life ... During the 36-hour rush to close an issue, 
Wenner began conducting what staffers would come to refer to as 'cocaine edits' on stories and covers, 
slashing them up during weekend frenzies..." 
"Unlike psychedelics, which inspired cosmic oneness with other people, cocaine inspired feelings of 
acute exclusivity, separating the cocaine haves from the cocaine have-nots."  
In the early 1970s, Jann Wenner took to cocaine like "an Irish poet to rhyme." 
"...But mainly, he saved money by regularly underpaying writers. As Wenner joked to a group of 
students in 1973, 'The better they are, the less we pay them.'" 
"The pages of Rolling Stone were endless expanses of prose, page after page of the novelistic, the 
literary, the baroque, the indulgent..." 
"In 1973, Jann Wenner was speaking to students at the University of Colorado about the success of 
Rolling Stone when a man bolted on stage and lobbed a pie into his face, declaring "A present from the 
Rock Liberation Front." 
Jann Wenner considered 60s activist Abbie Hoffman a "huckster," one who according to Rolling Stone 
lived in "capitalistic splendor while exploiting idealistic naifs." 
"The idea of Rolling Stone as a front for the Xerox Corporation had taken hold in certain precincts of the 
underground."  
